# Section 0: Learning Path Overview

## Why this is important

Ever since Python's inception a few decades ago, Python as a programming language has become quite popularized with it's
ease of use with basic programs, it's readability, and overall broad use cases. It's demonstrated tremendous range as a
programming language as it's often taught as a first language to many students while also excelling in the area data
science with huge movements in machine learning, and artificial intelligence.

The primary goal of this Learning Path is to break down multiple complex concepts into consumable, pedagogic material.
There will be concepts as straightforward as installing Python and properly handing dependencies; but also, there will
be concepts that are more difficult to grasp right away like API endpoints and Machine Learning.

## What you will be building

Throughout this guide, you will progress through setting up a productive Python environment, practicing Test Driven
Development (TDD) while building a REST API, and building a more complex endpoint that uses a Machine Learning Decision
Tree Model to predict.

This RESTful API that is all about the three penguin species on the three islands in the Palmer Archipelago, Antarctica.
The API will be able to perform basic CRUD (Create, Retrieve, Update, Delete) on a database storing said penguin
objects. You might be wondering why the Palmer Penguins were chosen for these exercises, but do not fret - it will all
make sense eventually!

## Lessons

1. Environment Setup
2. Setup Django Framework
3. TDD Django REST Framework `/GET` Endpoint
4. TDD Django REST Framework CRUD Endpoint
5. Machine Learning and Decision Trees
6. TDD Django REST Framework `/predict` Endpoint
7. Deploy Containerized Python Django REST application






