# Section 1: Environment Setup

## Environment Differences

Python is quite easy to set up and install; however, its installation can vary depending on which operating
system you are using. From this point on, all commands and environment set up will be tailored for a macOS machine.
When possible, the exercises will also include the respective Windows or Linux commands, but just note, if something
isn't
working or performing strange, ensure the command is correct for your system.

## Installing Python

This learning path will be using Python Version: `3.10.9`

To install, you can install with Homebrew using:

```bash
brew install python
``` 

or download directly from [python.org](https://www.python.org/downloads/)

Once Python is installed, you can check the version with:

```bash
python3 —version
```

__NOTE:__ This will be Different from python —version

## Dependencies and Virtual Environments

When you first install Python and you want to install a dependency, `out-of-the-box` behavior will require you to
install
a dependency globally on your system. This leads to the potential of dependency conflicts between multiple Python
projects on your machine. To create project specific dependencies, Python can be configured to use a Virtual Environment
to allow a project specific dependencies and versions.

#### Create new virtual environment

1. Create new directory:  `mkdir backend`

   __NOTE:__ (This learning path will use `backend` as the root directory name but this can be whatever you want)

2. Create new virtual environment `python3 -m venv .venv`

3. Activate the new virtual environment: `. .venv/bin/activate`

4. When switching projects, you can deactivate the virtual environment with  `deactivate`. To restart the virtual
   environment, just re-activate using Step 3 above.

__NOTE:__ Once the Virtual Environment has been activated, `python` can be used in place of `python3` because the
virtual
environment is aware of the specific Python version specified by your project.

## pip

`pip`, an acronym for `pip Install Packages`, is one option Python's package manager. This is useful for managing and
installing an application's dependencies. When working in a Virtual Environment, `pip` will install the dependencies in
the `.venv` folder to only be used with that specific project.

There are two ways to invoke `pip`, either with:

```bash
pip3 —version
```

or

```bash
python3 -m pip --version
```

## Install Dependencies

For this project, the following dependencies are required to build the REST API.  `Django` is the web
framework, `djangorestframework` is the framework to simplify creating REST endpoints, and `pytest-django` is an
extension
of `PyTest` that will simplify writing your Django tests. The command to install them all at once is:

```bash
pip install django djangorestframework pytest-django
```

A useful `pip` command is

```bash
pip3 freeze > requirements.txt
```

which will take all the installed dependencies from `pip` and copy them to the `requirements.txt` in the root of the
repository. This is standard practice within Python applications because it makes it easy to other team members to
install the necessary dependencies by using the command `pip install -r requirements.txt` using the above command.

__NOTE:__ Every time you install a new dependency, you must update the `requirements.txt` file.

## Testing

This project will be using Test Driven Development (TDD) throughout the entire learning paths, so it will be critical to
be able to easily write, run, and analyze your tests. This series, as mentioned earlier, will be using `PyTest` to run
and manage your tests.

### Configuration

`PyTest` requires a `pytest.ini` file at the root of your repository. Create a new configuration file like this:

```ini
# pytest.ini
[pytest]
DJANGO_SETTINGS_MODULE = project.settings
python_files = tests.py test_*.py *.test.py
```

This configuration specifies where the Django project settings are and which files `PyTest` should run as tests. There
is lots more of configuration that can be put into this file, but you will not need to know or worry about that for this
series.

### Add Gitignore

If you plan on making regular commits to version control, you should have noticed that the Virtual Environment and the
necessary dependencies can be quite cumbersome, so it's best to `.gitignore` those directories. This learning path
recommends using the `.gitignore` template from [Toptal](https://www.toptal.com/developers/gitignore/api/django).

## Wrap Up:

At the end of this learning path, you should have a directory layout that resembles this:

```text
.
├── .venv
├── .gitignore
├── pytest.ini
└── requirements.txt
```

where your `requirements.txt` file resembles:

```text
asgiref==3.6.0
attrs==22.2.0
Django==4.1.6
djangorestframework==3.14.0
exceptiongroup==1.1.0
iniconfig==2.0.0
packaging==23.0
pluggy==1.0.0
pytest==7.2.1
pytest-django==4.5.2
pytz==2022.7.1
sqlparse==0.4.3
tomli==2.0.1
```

## Continue Learning

[Python like a Pro: Installing Python (On Linux)](https://tanzu.vmware.com/developer/guides/gs-python-like-a-pro/)
[Python like a Pro: Managing Project Dependencies](https://tanzu.vmware.com/developer/guides/gs-managing-python-packages/)
[Python.org Documentation on Virtual Environments](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/guides/installing-using-pip-and-virtual-environments/)
[PyTest Configuration Settings](https://docs.pytest.org/en/7.1.x/reference/customize.html)