# Section 2: Django Setup

## Web Frameworks

### Django vs. Flask

Within the realm of Python and web frameworks, the two that commonly arise in conversation
are [Django](https://www.djangoproject.com/) and [Flask](https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/2.2.x/). In this learning
path, Django will be used as there is some preexisting material on Flask in a series
called [Python like a Pro](https://tanzu.vmware.com/developer/guides/cf-gs/). Although these open source web frameworks
have their similarities and differences, both are designed to simplify the programming experience for developers
building web applications. For more information on Flask or comparisons of web frameworks, there is a multitude of
online sources available describing the two frameworks in depth.

### Django vs. Django REST Framework

Now that you understand, at least the basics, of Django - you might be wondering _"What is the difference between Django
and Django REST Framework?"_. **Django**, at the very basic level, is the web framework that simplifies the creation of
web apps. **Django REST Framework** (Sometimes simplified as `DRF`) is a framework you can use that adds functionality
to Django by simplifying the process of creating, testing, and maintaining a
[REST API](https://tanzu.vmware.com/developer/guides/basics-of-rest/) in Python.

One thing to note, you can create a REST API without using Django REST Framework; however, it takes more time, more
complexity, and introduces a lot of implementation details that are normally abstracted away from the developer when
using Django REST Framework.

For more information, take a look at [Django REST Framework Documentation](https://www.django-rest-framework.org/)

### Database

Another benefit of using Django is that it is often called a _"Batteries Included"_ framework; for example, it comes
pre-configured with a ready to use SQLite database. As this series will be later be creating
a [CRUD Application](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Create,_read,_update_and_delete), you will
find it useful for debugging your server if you use some tools within your IDE. If you are using `Visual Studio Code`,
you would find using the [SQLite Explorer](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=alexcvzz.vscode-sqlite)
plugin. If you are using `IntelliJ`, the
built-in [database tool window](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/idea/database-tool-window.html) can also be used to debug
the database.

To dig more into Django databases, refer
to [Django REST Framework Documentation](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/4.1/ref/databases/)

## Create a new Django project

In the [previous section](./1.ENV-SETUP.md), you created a new Virtual Environment and installed the necessary
dependencies for the application you are building. Now, to actually create the project, at the root of your directory (
`backend`: the one with the .`venv` folder), run:

```bash
django-admin startproject project .
```

To understand how this command works, you need to understand a little about how Django works. When setting up a new
project, django-admin can be used to `startproject`. This takes in two parameters, a project name (in the example
above, `project`) and a file path (in example above, `.`) that determines where the new project should be located.

This command will create a new folder with the project name and a scaffolding of files that resembles something like
this:

```text
.
├── .venv
├── project
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── asgi.py
│   ├── settings.py
│   ├── urls.py
│   └── wsgi.py
├── manage.py
└── requirements.txt
```

### Django admin

Once you have created the Django project, you will no longer need to use `django-admin` as the generated
file `manage.py` will contain all the necessary django commands.

For example, to start this empty application, you can run:

```bash
python manage.py runserver
```

__NOTE:__ When you run the server for the first time, you will see an error similar to what is below, ignore this error
for now, it will be brought up again later in the project. This will not affect your current running application.

```text
Watching for file changes with StatReloader
Performing system checks...

System check identified no issues (0 silenced).

You have 18 unapplied migration(s). Your project may not work properly until you apply the migrations for app(s): admin, auth, contenttypes, sessions.
Run 'python manage.py migrate' to apply them.
February 08, 2023 - 01:14:37
Django version 4.1.6, using settings 'project.settings'
Starting development server at http://127.0.0.1:8000/
Quit the server with CONTROL-C.
```

For more information on `django-admin` and `manage.py`, you can visit
the [Django documentation](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/4.1/ref/django-admin/).

## Create a new Django application

After creating and understanding the project you have created, it is time to create your `application`. In general, the
project will contain high level configuration, settings, and routing of the entire project; while your application will
be treated as a Python module that will contain all of your relevant application files.

```bash
python manage.py startapp penguins
```

This takes in a single parameter: an application name (in the example above, `penguins`). This command will create a new
folder for your application with all the application scaffolding. The application file structure should look like:

```text
.
├── db.sqlite3
├── manage.py
├── penguins
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── admin.py
│   ├── apps.py
│   ├── migrations
│   │   └── __init__.py
│   ├── models.py
│   ├── tests.py
│   └── views.py
├── project
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── asgi.py
│   ├── settings.py
│   ├── urls.py
│   └── wsgi.py
├── pytest.ini
└── requirements.txt
```

Next, you need to add `rest_framework` and the new application name (`penguins`) to the list of `INSTALLED_APPS` in the
project `settings.py` file. This will ensure your Django project is aware of Django REST Framework and your new
application.

```py
INSTALLED_APPS = [
    'django.contrib.admin',
    'django.contrib.auth',
    'django.contrib.contenttypes',
    'django.contrib.sessions',
    'django.contrib.messages',
    'django.contrib.staticfiles',
    'rest_framework',  # <- Here
    'penguins',  # <- And Here
]
```

Following that, you will need to configure the project to route the `penguins` application correctly.

First, you can create a new file called `urls.py` at the root of the `penguins` application:

```python
from django.urls import path
from . import views

urlpatterns = [

]
```

You will later update this file to match your views to the project routing.

Next, you can now reference the new `penguin` application's `urls.py` inside of your project's `urls.py`:

```python
from django.contrib import admin
from django.urls import include, path

urlpatterns = [
    path('api/penguins/', include('penguins.urls')),  # <- Here
    path('admin/', admin.site.urls),
]
```

This means that whenever you start your application, you can navigate to `localhost:8000/api/penguins` and visit all the
different endpoints you create later in this project.

At this point, your repository should look like:

```text
.
├── db.sqlite3
├── manage.py
├── penguins
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── admin.py
│   ├── apps.py
│   ├── migrations
│   │   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── models.py
│   ├── tests.py
│   ├── urls.py
│   └── views.py
├── project
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── asgi.py
│   ├── settings.py
│   ├── urls.py
│   └── wsgi.py
├── pytest.ini
└── requirements.txt
```

Django and Django REST Framework projects and applications use this general project structure and separation of concerns
to make it easy to understand. In the next section, you will begin to test and build your REST API using these
scaffolds.

## Django Concepts

Before you move onto the next section, it is worth discussing a little about the primary Django concepts.

### Views

Views, or view functions, are one of the most important concepts within Django. Views are functions that take a web
request as a parameter and return a web response. Django Views can return any type of response like returning data in
the form of a `json` object or even an `html` page. In Django, views can either be functions or can be nested under a
class (called Class Based Views). Typically, the convention is to put the views in the `views.py` in your application.
This project will specifically name views "Controllers" as its primary role is to act as the gate between the client and
server.

More information on `views.py` at [Django Documentation](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/4.1/topics/http/views/)

### Models

To quote Django's documentation:

    A model is the single, definitive source of information about your data. It contains the essential fields and 
    behaviors of the data you’re storing. Generally, each model maps to a single database table.

    The basics:

        1. Each model is a Python class that subclasses django.db.models.Model.
        2. Each attribute of the model represents a database field.

In this project, you will only be building a single model: `penguin`.

To learn more about `models.py`, start by looking
at [Django Documentation](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/4.1/topics/db/models/)

### Urls

Django uses the `urls.py` to concisely organize the URL paths for your project and application. Generally, your
project `urls.py` will route to the different, respective application `urls.py` files that contain the specific routes
for each application. This will be discussed in great detail as you configure the URL routes in later sections.

More information on `urls.py` at [Django Documentation](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/4.1/topics/http/urls/)

## Django REST Framework Concepts

### Serializers

In Django REST Framework, serializers primary purpose is converting models into native Python primitives such that it
can be converted to `json`, `xml`, or other data structures. This is necessary to return data through a RESTful endpoint
because Python doesn't naturally understand how to "serialize" an object.

More information on `serializers.py`
at [Django Documentation](https://www.django-rest-framework.org/api-guide/serializers/)
